Update the release documentation (#11174)
vitessio/vitess: doc/internal/ReleaseInstructions.md

#### Code Freeze

Before creating RC1, there is a code freeze. Assuming the release of RC1 happens on a Tuesday, the release branch will be frozen Friday of the previous week.
This allows us to test that the release branch can be released and avoid discovering unwanted events during the release day. Once the RC1 is released, there are three more weeks to backport bug fixes into the release branches. However, we also proceed to a code freeze the Friday before the GA release. (Assuming GA is on a Tuesday)
Regarding patch releases, no code freeze is planned.

#### Tracking Issue for each Release

For each release, it is recommended to create an issue like [this one](https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/issues/10476) to track the current and past progress of a release.
It also allows us to document what happened during a release.

### Pre-Release

This step happens a few weeks before the actual release (whether it is an RC, GA or a patch release).
The main goal of this step is to make sure everything is ready to be released for the release day.
That includes:
- **Making sure Pull Requests are being reviewed and merged.**

>   > - All the Pull Requests that needs to be in the release must be reviewed and merged before the code freeze.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > - All the Pull Requests that need to be in the release must be reviewed and merged before the code freeze.
```

>   > - The code freeze usually happens a few days before the release. Make sure everything is merged by that date.

Reviewer: This line can be deleted? It's basically the same as the previous line, right?

Author: Correct, I removed the last sentence as it is redundant.

- **Preparing and cleaning the release notes summary.**
  > - One or more Pull Requests have to be submitted in advance to create and update the release summary.
  > - The summary files are located in: `./doc/releasenotes/*_*_*_summary.md`.
  > - The summary file for a release candidate is the same as the one for the GA release.
- **Finishing the blog post, and coordinating with the different organizations for cross-posting. Usually CNCF and PlanetScale. This step applies only for GA releases.**
  > - The blog post must be finished and reviewed.
  > - A Pull Request on the website repository of Vitess has to be created so we can easily publish the blog during the release day.
- **Code freeze.**
  > - As soon as we go into code freeze, if we are doing an RC, create the release branch.
  > - If we are doing a GA release, do not merge any new Pull Requests.
  > - The guide on how to do a code freeze is available in the [How To Code Freeze](#how-to-code-freeze) section.
- **Preparing the Vitess Operator release.**
  > - While the Vitess Operator is located in a different repository, we also need to do a release for it.
  > - The Operator follows the same cycle: RC1 -> GA -> Patches.

>   > - A documentation for the pre-release of the Vitess Operator is available [here](https://github.com/planetscale/vitess-operator/blob/main/docs/release-process.md#prepare-for-release).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > - Documentation for the pre-release of the Vitess Operator is available [here](https://github.com/planetscale/vitess-operator/blob/main/docs/release-process.md#prepare-for-release).
```

### Release

On the release day, there are several things to do:

- **Create the Vitess release.**
  > - A guide on how to create a Vitess release is available in the [How To Release Vitess](#how-to-release-vitess) section.
- **Create the corresponding Vitess operator release.**
  > - Applies only to versions greater or equal to `v14.0.0`.
  > - If we are doing an RC release, then we will need to create the Vitess Operator RC too. If we are doing a GA release, we're also doing a GA release in the Operator.
  > - The Vitess Operator release documentation is available [here](https://github.com/planetscale/vitess-operator/blob/main/docs/release-process.md#cut-release).
- **Create the Java release.**
  > - Applies only to GA releases.

>   > - This step is explained in the [Java Packages Deploy & Release](#java-packages-deploy--release) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > - This step is explained in the [Java Packages: Deploy & Release](#java-packages-deploy--release) section.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if the link will still work after introducing a `:`. You will need to verify that.

Author: This syntax seems to work

- **Update the website documentation repository.**
  > - Applies only to GA and RC releases.

>   > - There are two scripts in the website repository in `./tools/{ga|rc}_release.sh`, use them to update the documentations. The scripts automate:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > - There are two scripts in the website repository in `./tools/{ga|rc}_release.sh`, use them to update the website documentation. The scripts automate:
```

- **Make sure _arewefastyet_ starts benchmarking the new release.**
  > - This can be done by visiting [arewefastyet status page](https://benchmark.vitess.io/status).
  > - New elements should be added to the execution queue.
  > - After a while, those elements will finish their execution and their status will be green.
  > - This step is even more important for GA releases as we often include a link to _arewefastyet_ in the blog post.
  > - The benchmarks need to complete before announcing the blog posts or before they get cross-posted.
- **Update the release notes on the release branch and on `main`.**
  > - Two new Pull Requests have to be created.
  > - One against `main`, it will contain only the new release notes.
  > - And another against the release branch, this one contains the release notes and the release commit. (The commit on which we did `git tag`) 

### Post-Release

Once the release is over, we need to announce it on both Slack and Twitter. We also want to make sure the blog post was cross-posted, if applicable.
We need to verify that _arewefastyet_ has finished the benchmark too.

### How To Release Vitess

> This section is divided in two parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section is divided into two parts:
```

Create the `settings.xml` in the `$HOME/.m2/` directory as described in their [instructions](https://central.sonatype.org/pages/apache-maven.html).

-------

## Release Cutover 

> In this section we describe what is our current release process. We begin with a short [**overview**](#overview).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section we describe our current release process. We begin with a short [**overview**](#overview).
```

> The release process is divided in three parts: [**Pre-Release**](#pre-release), [**Release**](#release), [**Post-Release**](#post-release), which are detailed after the overview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The release process is divided into three parts: [**Pre-Release**](#pre-release), [**Release**](#release), [**Post-Release**](#post-release), which are detailed after the overview.
```

This allows us to test that the release branch can be released and avoid discovering unwanted events during the release day. Once the RC1 is released, there are three more weeks to backport bug fixes into the release branches. However, we also proceed to a code freeze the Friday before the GA release. (Assuming GA is on a Tuesday)
Regarding patch releases, no code freeze is planned.

#### Tracking Issue for each Release

For each release, it is recommended to create an issue like [this one](https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/issues/10476) to track the current and past progress of a release.
It also allows us to document what happened during a release.

### Pre-Release

This step happens a few weeks before the actual release (whether it is an RC, GA or a patch release).
The main goal of this step is to make sure everything is ready to be released for the release day.
That includes:
- **Making sure Pull Requests are being reviewed and merged.**
  > - All the Pull Requests that needs to be in the release must be reviewed and merged before the code freeze.

>   > - The code freeze usually happens a few day before the release. Make sure everything is merged for that date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > - The code freeze usually happens a few days before the release. Make sure everything is merged by that date.
```

- **Making sure the people doing the release have access to all the tools and infrastructure needed to do the release.**
  > - This includes write access to the Vitess repository and to the Maven repository. 
- **Preparing and cleaning the release notes summary.**
  > - One or more Pull Requests have to be submitted in advance to create and update the release summary.
  > - The summary files are located in: `./doc/releasenotes/*_*_*_summary.md`.
  > - The summary file for a release candidate is the same as the one for the GA release.

> - **Finishing the blog post, and coordinating with the different organisation on which we want to cross-post. Often with CNCF. This step applies only for GA releases.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Finishing the blog post, and coordinating with the different organizations for cross-posting. Usually CNCF and PlanetScale. This step applies only for GA releases.**
```

  > - The blog post must be finished and reviewed.
  > - A Pull Request on the website repository of Vitess has to be created so we can easily publish the blog during the release day.
- **Code freeze.**

>   > - During the day of the code freeze, if we are doing an RC, create the release branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > - As soon as we go into code freeze, if we are doing an RC, create the release branch.
```

  > - If we are doing a GA release, do not merge any new Pull Requests.

> - **Preparing the Vitess Operator release too.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Preparing the Vitess Operator release.**
```

  > - While the Vitess Operator is located in a different repository, we also need to do a release for it.
  > - The Operator follows the same cycle: RC1 -> GA -> Patches.

[//]: # (  > - TODO: Add the link to the Vitess Operator Release documentation)

### Release

> During the release day, there are several things to do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the release day, there are several things to do:
```

- **Make sure _arewefastyet_ starts benchmarking the new release.**
  > - This can be done by visiting [arewefastyet status page](https://benchmark.vitess.io/status).
  > - New elements should be added to the execution queue.
  > - After a while, those elements will finish their execution and their status will be green.
  > - This step is even more important for GA releases as we often include a link to _arewefastyet_ in the blog post.
  > - The benchmarks need to complete before announcing the blog posts or before they get cross-posted.
- **Update the release notes on the release branch and on `main`.**
  > - Two new Pull Requests have to be created.
  > - One against `main`, it will contain only the new release notes.
  > - And another against the release branch, this one contains the release notes and the release commit. (The commit on which we did `git tag`) 

### Post-Release

Once the release is over, we need to announce it on both Slack and Twitter. We also want to make sure the blog post was cross-posted, if applicable.
We need to verify that _arewefastyet_ has finished the benchmark too.

### How To Release Vitess

> This section is divided in three parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section is divided into three parts:
```

- How to release an RC: [Pre-Requisites for Release Candidates (`rc`)](#pre-requisites-for-release-candidates-rc).
- How to release a GA or Patch release: [Pre-Requisites for Releases](#pre-requisites-for-releases).
- Common to both, how to create the release on the GitHub UI: [#Creating Release or Release Candidate on the GitHub UI](#creating-release-or-release-candidate-on-the-github-ui)

#### Pre-Requisites for Release Candidates (`rc`)

> In this example our current version is `v11` and we release the version `v12.0.0-rc1`.
> Alongside Vitess' release, we also release a new version of the operator.
> Since we are releasing a release candidate here, the new version of the operator will also be a release candidate.

> > In this example, the new operator version is `2.7.0-rc1`.

Reviewer: We should use v14 or v15 as the example, since earlier in the doc we say that operator RC releases only apply to Vitess v14+

Reviewer: Ideally v15 with the corresponding version number for vitess-operator.

Author: Yes, that's a good point.

Author: Solved via e5606f0fab

1. Fetch `github.com/vitessio/vitess`'s remote.
    ```shell
    git fetch <vitessio/vitess remote>
    ```

2. Create a new release branch from `main`.
    ```shell
    git checkout -b release-12.0 upstream/main
    ```

3. Creation of the release notes and tags.
   1. Run the release script using the Makefile:
       ```shell
       make RELEASE_VERSION="12.0.0-rc1" DEV_VERSION="12.0.0-SNAPSHOT" VTOP_VERSION="2.7.0-rc1" do_release
       ```

>       The script will prompt you `Pausing so relase notes can be added. Press enter to continue`. We are now going to generate the release notes, continue to the next sub-step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The script will prompt you `Pausing so release notes can be added. Press enter to continue`. We are now going to generate the release notes, continue to the next sub-step.
```

Reviewer: If the script has the same typo that should also be fixed.

   
   2. Run the following command to generate the release notes:
       ```shell
       make VERSION="v12.0.0-rc1" FROM="v11.0.0" TO="HEAD" SUMMARY="./doc/releasenotes/12_0_0_summary.md" release-notes  
       ```
      This command will generate the release notes by looking at all the commits between the tag `v11.0.0` and the reference `HEAD`.
      It will also use the file located in `./doc/releasenotes/12_0_0_summary.md` to prefix the release notes with a text that the maintainers wrote before the release.

> 4. As prompted in the `do_release` Makefile command's output, push the the `v12.0.0-rc1` tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. As prompted in the `do_release` Makefile command's output, push the `v12.0.0-rc1` tag.
```

![alt text](.images/release-04.png)

### How To Code Freeze

> In this example we are going to do a code freeze on the `release-15.0` branch. If we are doing a release candidate, there won't be such branch, hence we need to create it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example we are going to do a code freeze on the `release-15.0` branch. If we are doing a release candidate, there won't be a branch yet, hence we need to create it.
```

Reviewer: Should add a step to make sure your local checkout is up-to-date before creating the branch. Basically `git fetch origin` first.

```
git checkout -b release-15.0 origin/main
```

The new branch will be based on `origin/main`, here `origin` points to `vitessio/vitess`. If we are not doing a release candidate, then the branch already exists and we can checkout on it.

Now, if we are doing a GA release, let's update the branch:

```
git pull origin release-15.0
```

Finally, let's run the code freeze script:

```
./tools/code_freeze.sh freeze release-15.0
```

The script will prompt the command that will allow you to push the code freeze change. Once pushed, open a PR that will be merged on `release-15.0`.

> ### Java Packages Deploy & Release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Java Packages: Deploy & Release
```
